Welcome... to another episode of Shiloh Creek. ...Where the water runs slow, the friends look out for each other, and every story starts at the pondside — with me.
I'm Old Timber. ...The elephant elder. ...And today's story... is about the day a brand-new little friend came walking down the path for the very first time.
Today... I want to ask you a question, little ones. ...What does it mean... to love your neighbour? ...Listen carefully. ...The answer is in the story.
Now... gather round, little ones. Come close by the pond.
The willow's leaning just right today, and the water's saying hello in that slow way it has. So settle in.
[excited] Ooh — Old Timber, is it a STORY story? ...With everyone in it?
Mm. Yes, little one. ...Everyone in it. ...Now... listen.
I want to tell you about the day a new friend arrived at Shiloh Creek — and how, sometimes, the smallest welcome is the biggest one.
[excited] Ooh! ...Tell us, Old Timber!
[playful] Yes! ...Tell us, but LOUDER!
[confident] Splosh-volume, brothers. ...We are listening.
...Now... settle in. ...Here we go.
Now, this was back in late spring. ...The creek was running clear, the meadow had that good warm smell to it, and the morning was the kind that makes you feel like something nice is going to happen — bless its quiet heart.
And so it was that on this particular morning — about the time the dew was starting to think about leaving — a small new visitor came walking down the path. ...Step. ...Stop. ...Step. ...Stop.
[whispers] ...is that — is that me?
Mm. Yes, little one. That's you.
She was a fawn. ...Soft brown, white spots, big nervous eyes — bless her gentle hooves. ...Brand new to the reserve. ...Brand new to everything, really. ...Now, the rest of us didn't know she was coming. ...Which, as it turned out, was the whole trouble.
Now, this is where things got interesting...
Up above the path, in the big old oak, sat Garingo the parrot — all bright feathers and dramatic flourish. ...Now, Garingo notices things. ...And the thing about Garingo noticing things is — well — everyone else ends up noticing them too.
He looked down. He saw her. He took the deepest breath a parrot can take. And he called out —
BEHOLD! A wayfarer in our midst! A traveller upon the path! A NEW soul has come to Shiloh Creek this morning, and I — I, Garingo — shall be the first to herald her arrival!
Old Timber — Old Timber, did I really say BEHOLD? Out loud?
...You did. Twice, actually. But I'm being kind.
Now, Fern — for that was her name — froze right where she stood. Bless her. She had been hoping to maybe just... slip in. Quietly.
And at the edge of the clearing, half hidden in the leaves, stood Fern the fawn — soft-eyed, and very, very small. She whispered,
[whispers] Oh — oh, um... hello...
She SPEAKS! Friends! Friends, come quickly! A new arrival! A fawn-of-the-morning!
And — well — friends came. ...They did indeed. ...First, you heard the thumping. ...Heavy, hopeful, joyful thumping down the path. ...And over hopped Bongo the bear cub, with his usual cheerful crash — bless his thumping paws. ...He said,
[excited] Where? ...Oh! Hi! ...I'm Bongo! I'm a bear! Well — a bear cub! ...I got this. ...I'm gonna welcome the new friend! ...Are you a deer? ...You're a deer! ...Hi, deer!
[whispers] Um... I'm — I'm Fern...
[excited] Fern! Welcome, Fern! Do you want a hug? I give the BEST hugs! I once hugged Garingo so hard he flew sideways!
He DID. He really did. I was sideways for an hour. It was an EXPERIENCE.
Now, Fern, bless her, did not say anything. ...She had taken one tiny step back. ...Then another. ...Then she looked at her own hooves, like maybe her hooves had advice. ...They did not.
And then — from somewhere above and very, very fast — came a small bright voice that sounded like it had run out of sentences and was making more on the way. ...And Zippy the hummingbird darted in, going so fast she was three places at once. ...She squeaked,
[excited] OH OH OH — I remember this! I had SEVEN ideas! I had SO MANY ideas!
Mm. You did, Zippy. You did. ...You go ahead, listen now.
[excited] Hi! New friend! ...Wait — I just had SEVEN ideas! ...We need a welcome banner — no — a welcome ARCH — no — a welcome ARCH with PETALS — ...oh and a song! ...Does she like songs? Everyone likes songs! ...Let's vote! Hands up! Wings up! Hooves up!
Bless her quick little wings — she meant every word.
[whispers] Oh — oh, I — um —
[excited] I'll get the petals! I know where the petals are! There are SO MANY petals!
And I — I shall compose the speech! 'On this most glorious morning, a fawn descended upon us — '
[excited] Oh! ...And a SECOND banner for the back! ...In case someone walks in backwards! ...It happens! Statistically!
[whispers] ...I really did want to leave. I really did.
Mm. I know, little one. Listen — here's what happened.
And in all the petals-and-poems-and-banners, nobody — not Garingo, not Bongo, not Zippy — nobody noticed that little Fern had taken three more steps back. ...She was almost in the leaves again. ...Now, that's about when someone else came along. ...Slow. ...Very slow. ...As slow as a Tuesday in summer.
And Shelly the tortoise — wise old Shelly — looked up slowly, took the whole picture in, and said,
...Friends. Friends. ...You're all very loud.
Now, the others didn't quite hear Shelly. ...Bongo was rummaging in the leaves. ...Zippy was sketching arch designs in mid-air. ...Garingo was on the third verse of his welcome speech and just getting warmed up.
But Shelly — she'd already seen the thing nobody else had seen. ...She was watching Fern. ...And Fern was looking at her own hooves again. ...And the leaves behind her. ...And the path she'd come down. ...Like a creature thinking about turning around. ...Shelly knew that look. ...But she didn't say anything. ...Not yet. ...She just thought it. ...Quietly.
...Mm. ...I remember this part.
I thought you might, Shelly. ...I thought you might.
Well, the welcome got bigger before it got smaller. ...Bongo came back with — and I am not exaggerating — every petal he could find. ...Possibly some that were still attached to plants. ...And he announced —
[excited] PETALS! I got petals! I got SO many petals! I got this! ...I — uh — I don't got this. I got too many petals. Why is my face petals?
[excited] Okay perfect — ...Bongo stand THERE — ...petals form an ARCH — ...Garingo recite the speech — ...Fern step forward on the count of — wait. ...I just had ANOTHER idea. ...What if there are BIRDS? ...Like, on PURPOSE? ...Like, choreographed birds?
Choreographed birds — Zippy, dear heart, I AM a bird. I shall choreograph MYSELF.
And during all of this — the petals, the arch, the choreographed birds — Fern said one small thing. ...So small the loud ones almost didn't hear it. ...She said,
[whispers] I think... I think I should go home.
[whispers] ...I really did say that, didn't I.
Mm. You did, little one. Bless your quiet heart. You did.
Well. ...That stopped them. ...Now, Bongo's face fell. ...Zippy stopped buzzing for the first time that morning — and you have to understand, that's about as rare as a quiet creek. ...And Garingo opened his beak. ...And closed it. ...And opened it. ...And — bless his bright heart — said,
...go? But — but we — we had banners.
[whispers] I — I got so many petals.
[excited] Wait. ...Did we — did we do welcoming wrong?
And that was when Shelly the tortoise — who, as we said, had been watching the whole time — finally took the slow step she'd been thinking about. ...One step. ...Then another. ...All the way over to Fern. ...Now, Shelly doesn't hurry. ...Shelly... gets there.
...Hello, Fern. ...I'll get there. I always do.
[whispers] ...You did. You really did. ...That was the best part, I think.
Mm. ...Yes, Bongo. I think so too.
...You don't have to do anything. You don't have to say anything. ...You're just here. That's the welcome.
Now... ...Fern looked at Shelly. ...And Shelly looked back. ...And nobody said anything for a long, slow tortoise-shaped moment. ...And then — for the first time all morning — Fern smiled. ...Just a tiny one. ...But it counted.
[whispers] ...Hello, Shelly. ...Thank you.
And the others — well, they were watching too, now. ...Bongo had sat down. ...Zippy was perfectly still — which, again, is almost a miracle. ...Garingo had quietly tucked his speech under his wing. ...And one by one, they came over. ...Slow. ...Like Shelly had shown them. ...Bongo went first.
[excited] Hi, Fern. ...I'm Bongo. I'm sorry about the petals. I'll go slow this time. ...I got this. ...Slowly.
[whispers] Hi, Fern. ...I'm Zippy. ...That was one idea. Just the one.
...And I am Garingo. ...That's all. ...Hello, Fern.
[whispers] Hi, Bongo. Hi, Zippy. Hi, Garingo. ...Hi, Shelly. ...Thank you. ...I think — I think I'll stay.
And just like that — the loudest welcome in the world had become the quietest one. And it was the one that worked.
Now, after all that... we wandered back here to the pond, the sun went a bit golden, and we all sat down together by the water. ...And I asked them — friends, what do you think it was, in the end, that made it work?
[whispers] ...Um. ...I think it was Shelly. Shelly went slow. I should — I should learn how to go slow. Maybe. ...A little.
Slow, you say? Bongo the bear cub going slow? Well — that I will believe when I see it. ...But you might surprise me yet.
[whispers] Okay — ...I think... ...welcoming someone isn't seven ideas. ...It might just be one idea. The right one. ...That's hard for me. ...I'm gonna keep working on it.
And I — I think a quiet welcome can be a grand one too. ...Even if it has no banners. ...Even if it has no — no speeches. ...Goodness, that hurt to say.
[whispers] ...I think... I think Shelly heard me when I was small. ...And that made me feel... bigger.
...Mm. ...I just walked over. ...I'll get there. I always do.
...Hm. ...Now... isn't that something? ...Funny how the loudest welcome in the world... wasn't the welcome at all. ...And the smallest one — well — the smallest one was the biggest one. ...Funny how it works that way.
[whispers] ...That's a beautiful memory, Old Timber.
Bless you, little one. ...It's your memory too, now.
And that, my little ones, is how I remember it. ...The day Fern came to Shiloh Creek.
Now, before you go — the Mudpuppy brothers have something they very much want to tell you about. Heaven help us all.
[playful] Welcome — yes welcome — TO MUDPUPPY MINUTES!
[playful] Mudpuppy Minutes! Mudpuppy Minutes! Mudpuppy MIN-utes!
[playful] MUDPUPPY MINUTES BUT LOUDER!
[playful] Today, friends — today, we shall explain... a very important word. The word is... NEW.
[playful] NEW! Oh I know this one! New means — new means — it means SHINY! New things are SHINY! Like a wet rock! A NEW rock is a SHINY rock!
[playful] NO! New means LOUD! When something is NEW you have to YELL about it! HELLO I AM NEW! See? NEW!
[confident] Brothers. BROTHERS. You are both — and I say this with love — wrong. New means COLD. When something is NEW it is COLD. Have you ever touched a new rock? Cold. A new puddle? Cold. A new morning? Cold. New is COLD.
[playful] ...Wait. So new means shiny.
[playful] AND LOUD.
[confident] AND COLD.
[playful] ...So a new thing is a SHINY, LOUD, COLD thing.
[playful] LIKE A BELL!
[confident] ON A COLD ROCK.
[confident] Mudpuppies, mudpuppies — we have solved it. ...Now ask us — what is NEW?
[playful] WHAT IS NEW?
[confident] SHINY!
[playful] LOUD!
[confident] COLD!
[playful] AND TOGETHER —
[confident] LIKE A BELL ON A COLD ROCK!
[playful] And friends... new means scary... until somebody says hello. ...That's the secret. ...Mudpuppy out!
...Well. ...That was not entirely accurate. ...But it was wonderful.
Now... my little ones. ...The Mudpuppies are wonderfully wrong about a lot of things. ...But Splosh just got the secret right. ...New means scary... until somebody says hello.
Today... Fern was the new one. ...And when Shelly walked over slow and said hello — that was the answer to my question.
[excited] Old Timber — ...what did we learn today?
Mm. ...We learned, my little ones... that being kind to someone new — someone we've never met — is how we love our neighbour. ...Sometimes the kindest welcome... is the quietest one.
And there's an old, old line... older than this pond, older than my shell... that goes like this. ...Thou shalt love thy neighbour... as thyself. ...That's from a very old book. ...And Fern reminded us how today.
Until the next breeze brings us together, little ones. ...Be kind out there.
See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.